in this video I'd like to tell you a bit
about the math behind large margin
classification this video is optional so
please feel free to skip it but they may
also give you better intuition about how
the optimization problem of the support
vector machine how that leads to large
margin classifiers in order to get
started let me first remind you of a
couple properties of what vector inner
products look like let's say I have two
vectors U and V that look like this so
both two dimensional vectors then let's
see what u transpose D looks like and nu
transpose D is also called the inner
product between the vectors U and V use
a two dimensional vector so I can plot
it on this figure so let's say that the
vector U and what I mean by that is if
on the horizontal axis that value takes
u whatever value u 1 is and on the
vertical axis the height of that is
whatever u 2 u 2 is the second component
of the vector u now one quantity that'll
be nice to have is the norm of the
vector u so these are your double bars
on the left and right that denotes the
norm or the length of U so this just
means really the Euclidean length of the
vector U and this will by Pythagoras
theorem is just equal to u1 squared plus
u2 squared square root right and this is
the length of a vector u that's a real
numbers just as you know what is what is
the length of this what is the length of
this vector down here the length what is
the length of this arrow will I just
drew is the norm of U now let's go back
and look at the vector V because we want
to compute the inner product so V will
be some other vector with some you know
value V 1
me too and so the vector V will look
like that draw me like so now let's go
back and look at how to compute the
inner product between you and me here's
how you can do it I'm going to take the
vector V and project it down onto the
vector U so I'm going to take a
orthogonal projection or a 90-degree
projection to project it down onto you
like so and what I'm going to do is
measure the length of this red line that
I just drew here's one call the length
of that red line P so P is the length or
is the magnitude of the projection of
the vector V onto the vector U and then
let me just write that down so P is the
length of the projection of the vector V
onto the vector U and it's possible to
show that the inner product u transpose
D that this is going to be equal to P
times the norm or the length of the
vector u so this is one way to compute
the inner product and if you actually
know if you actually do the geometry and
figure out what P is and figure out what
the norm of U is this should give you
the same way the same answer as the
other way of computing inner product
right which is if you take u transpose V
then u transpose is this u 1 u 2 is a 1
by 2 matrix n times V and so this should
actually give you u1 v1 + u2 v2 and so
the theorem of linear algebra that these
two formulas give you the same answer
and by the way u transpose V is also
equal to V transpose u so if you were to
do the same process in Reverse
instead of projecting V onto u you could
reject you want to be
you know do the same process but with
the rows of you in the reverse and you
actually you should actually get the
same number one in that number right and
just to clarify what's going on in this
equation the norm of U is a real number
and P is also a real number and so u
transpose V is the interpret is the is
the same in regular multiplication of
two row numbers of the length of P times
of mode with you just one last detail
which is if we look at the norm of P P
is actually signed so right and it can
be either positive or negative so let me
say what I mean by that if u is a vector
that looks like this and if V is a
vector that looks like this so that the
angle between U and V is greater than 90
degrees then if I project V onto u what
I'll get is a projection that looks like
this and so now that like P and in this
case I will still have that u transpose
V is equal to P times the norm of U
except that in this example P will be
negative so you know in inner products
if the angle between U and V is less
than 90 degrees then P is the positive
length of that red line whereas at the
angle this angle here is greater than 90
degrees then P here will be negative of
the length of the single-line a bad
little line segments over there and so
the inner product between two vectors
can also be negative and the angle
between them is greater than 90 degrees
so that's how vector inner products work
we're going to use these properties of
vector inner product so you try to
understand the support vector machine
optimization objective a little better
here's the optimization objective for
the support vector machine that we
worked out earlier just for the purpose
of this slide I'm going to make one
simplification or once just to make the
objective easy to analyze and what I'm
going to do is ignore the intercept
terms and we'll just ignore theta 0 and
set that to be equal to 0
to make things easy to plot I'm also
going to set n the number of features to
be equal to two so we have only two
features x1 and x2 now let's look at the
objective function the optimization
objective of the SEM when we have only
two features when n is equal to 2 this
is this can be written 1/2 of theta 1
squared plus theta 2 squared because we
only have two parameters theta 1 and
theta 2 and what I'm going to do is
rewrite this a bit in the write this as
1/2 of theta 1 squared plus theta 2
squared and then square root squared and
the reason I can do that is because for
any number you know W write the square
roots of W and then squared that's just
equal to W so till square roots and
squared should give me the same thing
and what you may notice is that this
term inside the parentheses that's equal
to the norm or the length of the vector
theta and what I mean by that is that if
we write out the vector theta like this
as you know theta 1 theta 2 then this
term that just underlined in red that's
exactly the length for the norm of the
vector theta following the definition of
the norm of a vector that we have on the
previous line and in fact this is
actually equal to the length of the
vector theta whether you write it as
theta 0 theta 1 theta 2 that is if theta
0 is equal to 0 as I see in here or just
the length of theta 1 theta 2 but for
this line I'm going ignore theta 0 so
that just your treat later as this up
right let me just write theta theta the
norm of theta is this theta 1 theta 2
only but the math works out either way
whether we include you know theta 0 here
or not so it doesn't sense not for the
matter for the rest of our derivation
and so finally this means that my
optimization objective is equal to
one-half of the norm of theta squared so
our support vector machine is doing in
the optimization objective this is
minimizing the squared norm of the
squared length of the parameter vector
of theta
now what I'd like to do is look at these
terms theta transpose X and understand
better what they're doing so given the
parameter vector theta and given an
example X what is this equal to
and on the previous slide we think about
what u transpose V looks like but
different vectors U and V and so we're
going to take those definitions you know
with theta and X I play the rules of U
and V let's see what that picture looks
like so let's say I plot let's say I
thought that just a single training
example let's say I have a positive
example drawing us across there and
let's say that's my example X I right so
what that really means is that I've
plotted on the horizontal axis some
value X i1 and on the vertical axis x i2
that's how I plot my training examples
and although we haven't been really
thinking of this as a vector what this
really is this is a vector from the
origin from 0 0 out to the location of
this training example and now let's say
we have a parameter vector theta and I'm
going to plug that as vector as well
what I mean by that is it would plot
theta 1 here and theta 2 there so what
is the inner product theta transpose X I
well using our earlier method the way we
compute that as we take my example and
project it onto my parameter vector
theta and then I'm going to look at the
length of this segment I'm coloring it
in red and I'm going to call that P
superscript I to denote that this is a
projection of the eye for training
example onto the parameter parameter
vector theta and so what we have is that
theta transpose X I is equal to
following what we had on the previous
slide this is going to be equal to P
times the length of the norm of the
vector theta and this is of course also
equal to theta 1 X 1 plus theta 2 X 2 so
if each of these you know is an equally
valid way of computing the inner product
between later and Exxon ok
so where does this leave us what this
means is that these constraints that
theta transpose X I'd be greater legal
one holders less than to the minus 1
what this means is it can replace these
with constraints that P I times X be
greater than equal to 1 because theta
transpose X I is equal to P I times the
norm of theta so writing that into our
optimization objective this is what we
get where I have instead of theta
transpose X I I now have this P I times
the norm of theta and just remind you we
worked out earlier too that this
optimization objective that can be
written as 1/2 times the norm of the
data squared so now let's consider the
training example that we have at the
bottom and for now continuing to use the
simplification that theta 0 is equal to
0 let's see what decision boundary the
support vector machine will choose
here's one option let's say the support
vector machine were to choose this
decision boundary this is not a very
good choice because it has very small
margin this decision boundary comes very
close to the training examples let's see
why the support vector machine would not
do this for this choice of parameters is
possible to show that the parameter
vector theta is actually at 90 degrees
to the decision boundary so that green
decision boundary corresponds to a
parameter vector theta that points in
that direction and by the way the
simplification that theta 0 equals 0
that just means that the decision
boundary has to pass through the origin
0 0 over there so now let's look at what
this implies for the optimization
objective
let's say that this example here let's
say that's my first example you know x1
if we look at the projection of this
example onto my parameters theta that's
the projection and so that little line
red segment that is equal to p1 that's
going to be pretty small right and
similarly if this example here if this
happens to be x2 that's my second
example then if I look the projection of
this example onto theta you know then
let me draw this one the magenta this
lower magenta line segment that's going
to be p2 that's the projection of the
second example onto my onto the
direction of my parameter vector theta
which goes like this and so this law
projection line segments will increase
while p2 will actually be a negative
number ring so p2 epdm because is in the
opposite direction this vector has
created a 90 degree angle with my
parameter vector theta is going to be
less than zero and so what we're finding
is that these terms P I and are going to
be pretty small numbers and so if we
look at the optimization objective and
see well for positive examples we need P
I times the norm of theta to be bigger
than either one but if P I over here if
p1 over here is pretty small that means
that we need the norm of theta to be
pretty large right because if p1 of
theta is small and we want p1 you know
times the norm of theta to be bigger
than angular 1 well the only way for
that be true for the product of these
two numbers to be large if p1 is small
is we set normal state set to be large
and similarly for our negative example
we need p2 times the norm of theta
to be less than or equal to minus one
and we saw in this example right that p2
is going to be a pretty small negative
number and so the only way for that to
happen as well is for the norm of theta
to be large but what we're doing and the
optimization objective is we're trying
to find a setting of parameters where
the norm of theta is small and so you
know if so this doesn't seem like such a
good direction for the parameter vector
theta
in contrast let's look at the different
decision boundary here let's say this
SVM chooses that decision boundary now
the picture is going to be very
different if that's a decision boundary
here's the corresponding direction for
theta and so with the decision boundary
you're being that vertical line that
corresponds to is possible to show using
linear algebra that the way to get that
green decision boundary is have the
vector theta be at 90 degrees to it and
now if you look at the projection of
your data onto the vector X let's say as
before that this example is my example
x1 so when I project this onto X onto
theta what I find is that this is p1
that length there is p1 and some other
example you know if that example is x2
and I do the same projection and what I
find is that this length here is a p2
really that's the gate this could be
left less than zero and you notice that
now p1 right MP to these lengths of the
projections will be much bigger and so
if we still need to enforce these
constraints that p1 of the norm of theta
is very simple one because p1 is so much
bigger now the norm of theta can be
smaller
and so what this means is that by
choosing the decision boundary shown on
the right instead of on the left the SVM
can make the norm of the parameters
theta much smaller so if you can make
the norm of theta smaller and therefore
make the squared norm of theta smaller
which is why the SVM will choose this
hypothesis on the right instead and this
is how the SVM gives rise to this large
margin classification effect namely if
you look at this green line if you look
at this green hypothesis we want the
projections of my positive negative
examples onto theta to be large and the
only way for that to hold true is if you
know surrounding this green line this is
a large margin there's this large gap
that separates the positive and negative
examples and this is is really the the
magnitude of this gap the magnitude of
this margin is exactly the values of P 1
P 2 P 3 and so on and this though is by
making the margin large about making
these terms P 1 P 2 P 3 and so on that
the SVM can end up with a smaller value
for the norm of theta which is what is
trying to do the objective and this is
why this support vector machine ends up
with a large margin classifiers because
it's trying to maximize the norm of
these peons which is a distance from the
training examples to your decision
boundary finally we did this whole
derivation using this simplification
that the parameter theta 0 must be equal
to 0 the effect of that as I mentioned
briefly is that if they to 0 is equal to
0 what that means is that we're
entertaining only decision boundaries
that pass through the origins of
decision boundaries that pass through
the origin like that if you allow theta
0 to be nonzero then what that means is
that you entertain decision boundaries
that do not pass through the origin like
that one I just drew and I'm not going
to do the full derivation but it turns
out that the same large margin proof
we're pretty much in exactly the same
way
and there's a generalization of this
argument that we just went through them
not to go through that shows that song
even when theta zero is nonzero what the
SVM is trying to do when you have this
optimization objective which again
corresponds to the case of when C is
very large but is possible to show that
you know when theta zero is not equal to
zero the support vector machine is still
finding is really trying to find freeing
large margin separator between the
positive and negative examples
so that explains how the support vector
machine is a large margin classifier in
the next video we'll start to talk about
how to take some of these SVM ideas and
start to apply them to building complex
nonlinear classifiers as well